The Liquid: You can use water or milk, or a combination of the two. Water allows you to bake either hotter or longer (or both) without as much risk of the choux over-browning, while milk, thanks to its extra proteins and sugars, leads to a more rapidly browned crust. In many instances you can use one or the other in the same choux recipe without issue, though it can be useful to take advantage of a milk-based choux's enhanced browning when baking smaller pastries like chouquettes and éclairs, allowing you to achieve a good level of color development without risk of over-baking the choux puff and drying it to a crisp.
The Fat: Butter is the fat of choice for choux, making for a rich and crispy pastry that plays just as well sweet or savory.
The Seasonings: At the very least, choux should be seasoned with salt. If it's going to be used for a dessert, a small amount of sugar can also be added to the paste to gently push it in a sweet direction.
The Flour: Choux can be made with a range of wheat flour types. Some cooks prefer low-protein cake or pastry flour for the delicate choux puffs they can create, while others swear by high-protein bread flour for the sturdier choux it produces. I focused my recipe development on a standard all-purpose flour like Gold Medal. It works well, sitting nicely between the delicacy of a low-protein flour and the heft of a high-protein one. It’s also the one type of flour home cooks are most likely to have in stock at all times.
The Eggs: Eggs loosen the thick, cooked flour-water-butter paste thanks to the high water content of the whites, and enrich it with more fat from the yolks. And because eggs solidify as they cook, they also help ensure the cooked choux will set properly and hold its final shape.
The Optional Add-Ins: A basic choux dough ends with the eggs, but in some cases you’ll want to mix in some other ingredients. For cheesy gougères, that would be grated Gruyere, plus possibly a pinch of nutmeg, and/or black pepper. For pommes dauphine (fried potato puffs), you'd fold your choux with mashed potatoes, then form it into balls and deep fry it. I'm sure if creativity struck, one could think up plenty more to mix into choux in new and delicious ways.